**DMIK: A Highly General, Fast, Constrainable, and Stable Inverse
Kinematics algorithm**

This document introduces Delta Minimizing Inverse Kinematics (DMIK).
DMIK is fast and stable and remains so under arbitrary joint orientation
constraints, multiple end-effectors and intermediary effectors, position
and orientation targets of arbitrary target weight priority, and any mix
of the aforementioned. DMIK does not explicitly support telescoping
joints, though whether it is amenable to is an open and unconsidered
question.

**Introduction and Motivation:**

The two most popular general approaches to the Inverse Kinematics
problem for real-time or semi real-time use cases are Cyclic Coordinate
Descent (CCD) and Forward And Backward Reaching Inverse Kinematics
(FABRIK). The strengths and weaknesses of these two approaches are
almost precise complements of one another. Leaving developers to pick
their poison.

CCD offers highly stable and fast solutions that behave well under joint
constraints. However, CCD can solve only for single target-effector
pairs, and becomes highly unstable when attempting to negotiate between
multiple effectors with potentially mutually exclusive targets.

FABRIK offers highly stable and fast solutions that naturally handle
multiple effectors with potentially mutually exclusive targets. However,
FABRIK is, in practice, extremely unstable when applied to bones with
joint constraints.

Foregoing joint constraints to ensure stable FABRIK solutions results in
highly unnatural (often extremely painful) looking poses. While
foregoing consideration of more than one target-effector pair per bone
to ensure stable but well constrained CCD solutions results in
incomplete poses, where even if two separate chains with two separate
effectors could theoretically both reach their targets while obeying all
constraints, only one effector actually does.

**The Basic Idea:**

DMIK can be thought of as a generalization of the concept (though not
necessarily the mathematics) of Inverse Kinematics by CCD. However,
where for every bone in a chain, CCD seeks to minimize the angular
distance between the chain's end-effector and its corresponding target
from the perspective of that bone, DMIK instead seeks to minimize the
average distance between all effectors and their corresponding targets
from the perspective of that bone.

More specifically, the DMIK procedure starts from the outermost bones of
an armature, and proceeds rootward as follows:

1.  Translate all relevant effectors and corresponding targets such that
    > they are centered about the bone's origin.

2.  Find the rotation that minimizes the average of the distances
    > between each effector-target pair, and apply that rotation to the
    > bone.

3.  Rectify the bone's orientation to be back within an allowable
    > orientation as per any limits imposed by any dampening parameters
    > or joint constraint on the bone if necessary, then proceed to the
    > next bone.

Once the root bone or effector has been reached, repeat this process
until convergence or budget exhaustion.

**A Deeper Look: **

At first glance, the devil might appear to be hidden in step 2. But on
closer consideration, step 2 amounts to a simple case of a *Constrained
Orthogonal Procrustes Problem*. This type of problem arises often in
bioinformatics, astronomy, crystallography and computer vision, and can
be readily solved by any number of existing algorithms. Of these, the
Kabsch alignment algorithm and the Quaternion Characteristic Polynomial
(QCP) algorithms are perhaps the most popular. DMIK has been verified to
work fine with either algorithm, but QCP is recommended for its speed,
simplicity, framework agnosticism, and relatively few edge-cases^[^1]^.

Efficient implementations of both the QCP and Kabsch alignment
algorithms are widely available in a number of languages, and as they
(and related algorithms) are roughly interchangeable for our purposes,
their mathematical peculiarities will not be covered, and the rest of
this document will refer to whatever algorithm you choose for the
purpose of minimizing the average of the distances of point-pairs as
*The Minimizer*.

**Orientation Targets:**

Consider a humanoid (perhaps yourself, if you happen to be approximately
humanoid in shape) sitting at a table, with the back of its hand flat
against the table such that its fingers are pointing directly away from
its torso. If the humanoid were instructed to rotate its hand around its
middle knuckle, such that the back of its hand remained flat against the
table, but its fingers now pointed toward its torso, the orientation of
all of the bones in the humanoid, from its wrist up to its shoulder and
perhaps even part of its spine would have to change drastically to allow
for this.

If we treat the humanoid's pelvis as one effector and the chair as that
effector's target, and treat its knuckle bone as another effector, and
the spot on the table to which the knuckle bone must remain affixed as
the knuckle bone's target, we see that even if the positions of the
targets do not change at all, there can be massive differences in the
poses an armature must adopt based solely on the orientations of its
targets.

From this we see the importance of treating target orientations as first
class citizens throughout the entire IK procedure. If we solve only for
positions and leave target orientations as an afterthought (as CCD and
FABRIK implementations most often do) we are left to decide between
"cheating" and violating joint constraints so an effector is still
aligned with its target (often resulting in effector joints that look
like they're painfully hyperextending), or else obeying the joint
constraints and failing to solve for a completely valid target.

One of DMIK's strengths is that almost no distinction at all is made by
the solver between position and orientation targets. Both orientation
and position are encoded as point pairs for the Minimizer to solve for.

This is done by representing each target as a set of up to seven points.
One point representing the target origin, three points representing the
basis vectors emanating from that origin, and three points representing
the inverses of the basis vectors with respect to the target origin.
Effectors are given the same treatment. These 7 effector-target pairs
are then fed to the minimizer, which attempts to find the rotation that
minimizes the average distance between all effector-target pairs.

*Figure 1.1 - 1.2: Effector bases are marked in orange, target bases are
marked in blue. Dashed magenta lines indicate the deltas between each
effector basis vector/origin and its corresponding target basis vector /
origin. ***âŠ•** *indicates the origin of the bone under consideration at
this step in the algorithm*.

![](Pictures/10000000000004000000040014FDC3377E0AD7E4.png){width="3.0626in"
height="2.6457in"}![](Pictures/1000000000000400000004007DA1871E5E883934.png){width="2.8484in"
height="2.6598in"}

[^1]:  Note that with single floating point precision, QCP may under
    some degenerate conditions require renormalization of the resultant
    quaternion. This does not affect solution quality, but may be worth
    considering for anyone looking to hyper-optimize performance.
